[26.2] Improved cluster health summary (#1805)
redpanda-data/documentation: modules/manage/partials/monitor-health.adoc

Redpanda's Raft implementation exchanges periodic status RPCs between a broker and its peers. The xref:reference:public-metrics-reference.adoc#redpanda_node_status_rpcs_timed_out[`redpanda_node_status_rpcs_timed_out`] gauge increases when a status RPC times out for a peer, which indicates that a peer may be unresponsive and may lead to problems with partition replication that Raft manages. Monitor for non-zero values of this gauge, and correlate it with any logged errors or changes in partition replication.

ifndef::env-cloud[]
[[cluster-health]]
=== Cluster health

> A healthy cluster has all brokers responding, a leader for every partition, and an elected controller. Redpanda can export this cluster health summary as a set of Prometheus metrics, so you can alert on overall cluster health from your metrics system instead of polling xref:reference:rpk/rpk-cluster/rpk-cluster-health.adoc[`rpk cluster health`] or the link:/api/doc/admin/operation/operation-get_cluster_health_overview[health overview Admin API].

Reviewer: "this cluster health summary", but this is the first sentence in this section and doesn't explain what summary "this" refers to. Probably missing an intro to that here?

Author: @travisdowns does this work? "A healthy cluster has all brokers responding, a leader for every partition, and an elected controller. Redpanda continuously assembles these signals into a cluster health summary. Redpanda can export this summary as a set of Prometheus metrics..." adding a link to the Available metrics section as well.

Reviewer: Yes that version sounds great!

These metrics are disabled by default. When enabled, every broker periodically assembles its own view of the health overview and exposes it on the public metrics endpoint, prefixed with `redpanda_cluster_health_`. For most of these metrics, a value of `0` means healthy and any value greater than `0` indicates a problem.

NOTE: Cluster health metrics require Redpanda version 26.2 or later.

==== Enable cluster health metrics

> Set xref:reference:properties/cluster-properties.adoc#health_monitor_metrics_enabled[`health_monitor_metrics_enabled`] to `true`. This property requires a broker restart to take effect.

Reviewer 2: Surprised this is opt in @tyson-redpanda . Not high cardinality at all and quite useful in the general case

ifndef::env-kubernetes[]
[,bash]
----
rpk cluster config set health_monitor_metrics_enabled true
----
endif::[]

ifdef::env-kubernetes[]
[tabs]
======
Helm + Operator::
+
--
.`redpanda-cluster.yaml`
[,yaml]
----
apiVersion: cluster.redpanda.com/v1alpha2
kind: Redpanda
metadata:
  name: redpanda
spec:
  chartRef: {}
  clusterSpec:
    config:
      cluster:
        health_monitor_metrics_enabled: true
----

```bash
kubectl apply -f redpanda-cluster.yaml --namespace <namespace>
```

--
Helm::
+
--
[tabs]
====
--values::
+
.`health-metrics.yaml`
[,yaml]
----
config:
  cluster:
    health_monitor_metrics_enabled: true
----
+
```bash
helm upgrade --install redpanda redpanda/redpanda --namespace <namespace> --create-namespace \
--values health-metrics.yaml --reuse-values
```

--set::
+
[,bash]
----
helm upgrade --install redpanda redpanda/redpanda \
  --namespace <namespace> \
  --create-namespace \
  --set config.cluster.health_monitor_metrics_enabled=true
----

====
--
======
endif::[]

> Each broker refreshes the metrics on an interval of 10 times xref:reference:properties/cluster-properties.adoc#health_monitor_max_metadata_age[`health_monitor_max_metadata_age`] (100 seconds by default). Enabling the metrics increases CPU usage and network traffic, so capture a baseline before and after you turn them on.

Reviewer: I think we should remove `, so capture a baseline before and after you turn them on.`

Also it's probably best to indicate this is a modest increase in resource utilziation.

Author: Removed phrase and added "modest increase in CPU usage and network traffic." -- let me know if that's not correct @travisdowns

Reviewer: Looks good!

> Each broker refreshes the metrics on an interval of 10 times xref:reference:properties/cluster-properties.adoc#health_monitor_max_metadata_age[`health_monitor_max_metadata_age`] (100 seconds by default). Enabling the metrics causes a modest increase in CPU usage and network traffic.

Reviewer 2: Takes a minute to grok this maybe we just spell out the default interval @kbatuigas

Author: Updated

|xref:reference:public-metrics-reference.adoc#redpanda_cluster_health_cluster_size[`redpanda_cluster_health_cluster_size`] |gauge |Number of known cluster members. Informational.
|xref:reference:public-metrics-reference.adoc#redpanda_cluster_health_nodes_in_recovery_mode[`redpanda_cluster_health_nodes_in_recovery_mode`] |gauge |Number of brokers in recovery mode. Informational; does not affect the health verdict.
|xref:reference:public-metrics-reference.adoc#redpanda_cluster_health_bytes_in_cloud_storage[`redpanda_cluster_health_bytes_in_cloud_storage`] |gauge |Bytes stored in object storage. Informational; `0` if Tiered Storage isn't enabled.
|xref:reference:public-metrics-reference.adoc#redpanda_cluster_health_metadata_age_seconds[`redpanda_cluster_health_metadata_age_seconds`] |gauge |Seconds since the last successful refresh on the broker. Reports a very large value before the first refresh so that staleness alerts fire.
|xref:reference:public-metrics-reference.adoc#redpanda_cluster_health_refreshes_total[`redpanda_cluster_health_refreshes_total`] |counter |Number of successful refreshes on the broker.
|===

> NOTE: The informational metrics (`cluster_size`, `nodes_in_recovery_mode`, and `bytes_in_cloud_storage`) don't affect whether the cluster is considered healthy.

Reviewer 2: Surprised nodes in recovery node would not impact cluster health @pgellert @tyson-redpanda

[,promql]
----
max(redpanda_cluster_health_nodes_down)
----

Use `max()`, not `sum()`. Every broker reports its own copy, so `sum()` returns roughly the broker count times the real value. Aggregation is fine for coarse cluster-health alerting, but it's noisier during controller elections and broker restarts, and a stale or partitioned broker still contributes its last cached view.

For a lower-noise signal, read the metric only from the current controller leader by joining against the Raft `leader_for` gauge for the controller partition:

[,promql]
----
redpanda_cluster_health_unhealthy_reasons
  and on(instance)
    redpanda_raft_leader_for{namespace="redpanda",topic="controller",partition="0"} == 1
----

This join returns a value only while some broker is the controller leader. If no broker is the leader, for example when the cluster has no controller at all, the query returns an empty result, which an alert configured to fire above zero would not catch. Pair the join with a separate alert that fires when no broker reports itself as the controller leader:

[,promql]
----
sum(redpanda_raft_leader_for{namespace="redpanda",topic="controller",partition="0"}) == 0
----

> A controller election creates a brief window where no broker is the leader, and the joined series drops out. Use a `for` duration of at least one minute on these alerts to ride through normal elections.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A controller election creates a brief window where no broker is the leader, and the joined series drops out. Configure your alert to fire only when this metric has been non-zero for at least one minute on these alerts to avoid spurious alerts during normal elections.
```

Author: Updated
